one by one; for of course they did not have sense enough to know when
to go home,--they who were out in the world for the first time!

                     *      *      *      *      *

Lisbeth was lying again in her little room. It was the evening of her
first working day. She had said her simple evening prayer, as usual,
and then stretched herself out on the bed, feeling how good it was to
rest, for her body was tired through and through.

What a day it had been! A long day, too, she knew; nevertheless, she
could not imagine where it had gone. She felt that she must think over
all that had happened. But drowsiness came stealing upon her and threw
the scenes of the day into confusion. She saw a pair of big horns that
plowed like a snow plow through a swarming crowd, and then she saw
Brindle standing in her stall with her head on one side and a big
bandage over one of her horns, looking exactly like an old peasant
woman with a kerchief tied around her head for a headache; and then she
thought she saw, written in the air, a couplet that she had once heard:

    Rearing its tail against the sky,
    Danced the calf on the hilltop high.

And then Lisbeth Longfrock fell asleep.

                     *      *      *      *      *

The next day, with the lunch bag upon her back, Lisbeth Longfrock set
out for a forest that lay not far off, taking the sheep and goats with
her. She had not succeeded in getting Crookhorn to go along, however.
The self-willed goat had taken the shortest cut up to the north meadow,
where the cows were again pastured.

Lisbeth's second working day, like her first, seemed a very long one,
for the forest was wonderfully lonesome and still. The little girl had
time to think of many, many things,--of her mother and Jacob and
Peerout Castle; and it must be acknowledged that she cried a wee bit,
too.




CHAPTER V

SUMMER: TAKING THE ANIMALS UP TO THE SÆTER


Upward over the open slope across the valley from Hoel Farm a lengthy
procession was taking its way.

Kjersti Hoel stood at the window of her room, following the procession
with her eyes as long as she could, for soon it would vanish from the
open slope into the wooded part of the mountain. The herds belonging to
Hoel Farm were that day being taken up to the sæter,[8] to spend the
summer grazing on the rich grass which grows in sunny spaces here and
there on the mountain heights.

      [8] Pronounced (approximately) say'ter.

At the head of the procession rode the milkmaid on the military
horse,[9] which for this occasion had a woman's saddle upon its back.
The saddle had a high frame, so that it looked almost like an
easy-chair; and the milkmaid sitting aloft on it, dressed in her best,
and with a white linen kerchief on her head, was rosy, plump, and also
somewhat self-conscious, for was not she the most important person in
the company, the one who was to give all the commands?

      [9] In some districts of Norway the farmers are required to keep
      one or more horses subject to the needs of the government, under
      certain conditions of use and payment.

After her came two farm hands, each leading a horse whose back fairly
curved in under its heavy load. Then followed the herds in order of
rank. First came the bell cow, then Brindle with her wounded horn that
had grown on awry, then Crookhorn, then Darkey, and behind Darkey the
whole long train of cows,--all except two, old Moolley and the pet, Wee
Bonny, who were to stay at home to furnish milk for the people there
and to teach the new calves to follow. After the cows stalked the big
bull, as if acting as rear guard for his herd.

Next came the goats, hurrying along and trying to get ahead; then the
sheep in a tight clump; and behind these, four great pigs and a few
calves; while at the very end of the train came the under-milkmaid, and
Lisbeth Longfrock with her lunch bag on her back.

In the beginning all had gone as gayly as a dance, for almost every one
had pleasant memories of the summer before, and it seemed impossible to
reach the mountain top quickly enough; but as they mounted, the way
became steeper and steeper, and the sun rose higher and higher, burning
their backs. The pigs began to lag behind, trying to branch off at
every side path so as to get a little nap in the shade or cool
themselves in a mudhole. The sheep and goats, feeling the need of
something in their stomachs, slipped aside whenever they spied a young
birch tree whose leaves they could nibble, or a fence to peep through,
or a plot of green grass. The last year's calves, who had not been to
the sæter before, saw no reason at all for hurrying, and made no
attempt at it except when the stick was used upon them.

So Lisbeth Longfrock had to keep rushing off the road into side paths,
behind bushes, into forest thickets and boggy marshes, to drag the
various creatures back into line; and scarcely did she get them safely
into the road from one side before they slipped out again on the other.

She had to take off one of her long knitted garters and tie it around
her waist so that she could tuck her long frock up out of the way; for
she was constantly on the run, coaxing, shouting, and circumventing.

It was a hard struggle. Her light hair became dripping wet and her face
was as red as a half-ripe mountain cranberry; but Lisbeth did not
notice her discomfort, so absorbed was she in what she had to do. The
under-milkmaid would return to the farm with the men when the sæter was
reached. It was Lisbeth who was to have the responsibility for the
smaller animals during the whole summer, and who was to bring them home
in the autumn fat and glossy. She and the head milkmaid had their
special responsibilities, each at her own end of the line, as it were;
and even if Lisbeth's was only the tail end, she did not wish to have
the disgrace of being unable to keep it in order.

The procession continued mounting higher and higher, and soon the whole
valley lay below, deep and wide and delicately green. The fir trees
became smaller and more scattered, the slender birches grew closer
together. Before long the first specimens of black crowberries and "old
woman's switches" (dwarf birch trees) were seen; and with that the
procession was up over the crest of the mountain side.

[Illustration: THE VALLEY AND THE FARMS]

Then, all at once, it seemed as if a heavy weight slipped off; as if
all weariness was smoothed away from man and beast. The whole mountain
sent its freshness and peace streaming over them. They were in a new
world. Before them, with its boundless surface broken into level spaces
and undulating slopes, lay the mountain top, stretching itself far, far
away, until lost in the deepening blue of a snow-streaked summit. If
they looked back, the valley seemed to have sunk out of sight; but on
the mountain top across the valley they could see wide expanses of open
land dotted with shining water and grassy sæter districts.

Drawing a long breath, all gazed silently around. What a tranquillity
lay over everything! Of their own accord the animals fell into order
along the stony road curving endlessly beyond them. They made no more
attempts to branch off into side paths, but walked slowly along at an
even pace. That gave Lisbeth a little time to view her surroundings.
She had never seen a place so broad and open. And up here she was to
spend the whole bright summer.

All at once, in the midst of this vastness and space, Lisbeth felt
herself so wonderfully little! But she was not at all terrified; she
only felt very solemn and peaceful.

She began to think of the future,--of the rest of the day, the coming
summer, and the many summers that would follow. Sometime she herself
would be big and grown up, like the head milkmaid, whom she could now
see sitting on the high saddle far ahead. Sometime she herself would
sit up there, perhaps, and ride at the front.

The pack horses refused to go slowly now, even under their heavy loads.
They forged ahead, passed the mounted milkmaid, and soon disappeared
over a distant ridge. The procession followed slowly. Hour after hour
it wound its curving way over ridges and brooks, past sæters and
shining mountain lakes. Lisbeth had the honor of sitting up in the
saddle and riding awhile, the milkmaid feeling that she would gladly
walk a little.

Evening began to draw nigh. They took their way high up through a gap
in the mountain which they had seen in the distance early in the
morning. After that the road began to descend. They met with birch
trees again and one single warped fir tree; and from below they heard
the rushing sound of a large river.

They reached at last the edge of the sæter valley to which they were
bound, and stood still to look down. Below them lay a comparatively
level space, peaceful and green, with its three sæter huts, belonging
to Hoegseth,[10] Lunde,[11] and Hoel farms. From the chimneys of two
of the huts smoke was ascending in the still afternoon air.

      [10] Pronounce the _oe_ like the _e_ in _her_ and _th_ like
      _t_.

      [11] Loond'eh (_oo_ as in _good_).

The gazers were filled with delight. This, then, was the spot where
they were to spend the summer! The cows began to bellow. The smaller
animals, one and all, started on a run past the cows and down the hill.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Early the next morning Lisbeth was on her way across the mountain
pasture with the small animals in her charge. She did not have the
lunch bag on her back now, for while she was up at the sæter she was to
take dinner at the hut every noon.

The sunshine was brilliant. The cows had been turned loose and were
walking away on the nearest cow path, going in single file as if strung
on a line. The leader's bell rang deeply and regularly, its tone
mingling with others quite as deep from the neighboring sæters; and in
upon this solemn ringing broke the delicate, brisk dingle-dangle of the
smaller creatures' bells.

The time had now come when Lisbeth Longfrock was to make her first
entrance into the vast unknown. The milkmaid had told her that while
tending her animals this first day she should not wander too far, lest
she might not be able to find her way back. She was to listen to the
other herders and keep near them. The milkmaid did not know whether the
other herders were boys or girls this year.

Lisbeth kept looking back every now and then to keep track of the way
she had come, and was apparently loath to lose sight of the hut; but
the animals drifted rapidly off in the distance and she had to follow
so as not to lose sight of them altogether, and after a while, when she
looked back, the hut could not be seen. Around her were only the
unending wastes of hill and marsh and the faraway mountain peaks. How
spacious and silent it was! Not a sound was to be heard except that of
the bells; not even the river's rushing harmonies reached up to where
she stood.

She suddenly felt herself so utterly alone and remote and had such a
longing to caress some living creature that she went among the flock
and petted now this one and now that. The bell goat became so envious
that it butted the others out of the way and stood rubbing itself
against her.

All at once there came a call, "Ho-i-ho! ho-i-ho!" so loud and clear
that the mountains echoed with it. The goats pricked up their ears, and
Lisbeth, too, listened breathlessly. The call was so unexpected that
she had not distinguished from what quarter it came. It sounded near,
and yet, because of the echoes, from all directions.

"Ho-i-ho! ho-i-ho!" This time the call was still louder. Presently she
heard bells, several bells, and then she saw a large flock of sheep and
goats come straggling over the crest of a hill.

Very likely it was the other herders who were calling. Lisbeth saw two
straw hats rise above the hill, and by degrees two tall boys seemed to
grow up out of the hilltop,--boys about as big as Jacob.

At sight of them Lisbeth felt so shy that she kneeled down and hid
herself behind a bushy little mound.

The boys shaded their eyes with their hands and looked down from the
hilltop.

"Ho-i-ho!" they called, and then listened. "Ho-i-ho!"

No answer. All was still.

Then one of the boys cried out:

    Oh, ho! you boy from Hoel, don't you hear?
    If you have pluck, we call you to appear!

They stood awhile, watching. Then they darted forward, turned two or
three somersaults, and ran down the hill toward her, repeating their
call and shouting. Again they stopped and listened, as if uncertain.

"Ho-i-ho!" Again they challenged:

    If you lie hid behind some bush or stone,
    Come out and show there's marrow in your bone!

Then the two boys came to the bottom of the hill, where Lisbeth's flock
was, and looked around. No, they did not see any one. The new herder
from Hoel, who dared to lose track of his flock the first day, must be
a reckless young scamp--a fellow it might be fun to get acquainted
with. Very likely he had heard of their bathing place in the Sloping
Marsh. Probably that was where he had gone now.

Well, they would take his animals with them and go there themselves;
but first they would give another call. Perhaps he was not so far away
but that he might hear if they gave a good loud one.

"Ho-i-ho!" From far away echo repeated the sounds in "dwarf language,"
as the Norwegian boys call it.

When all was still again, there sounded close at hand, as thin and
clear as the peep of a bird, "Ho-i-ho!"

This was from Lisbeth, who, when she heard that they were going to take
her flock away, felt that she ought to call out, although it was
extremely embarrassing.

The boys stopped short, greatly astonished. From behind the bushy
little mound there arose something small, just like a tiny "hill
woman," in a plaid neckerchief and a long frock, who stood stock-still
and looked at them with large, shy eyes.

At sight of her the boys were somewhat abashed. It was a little
embarrassing for them to find that their boastful, taunting rhymes had
been directed against a poor timorous "young one," and a girl at that;
but it was exasperating, too, for they had expected to see a comrade of
their own size.

Humph! any one could see that Hoel Farm had women folk at the head of
it. The mistress was not willing that even the herder should be a boy.

If the "young one" had only been bigger,--bigger than themselves,--they
could have shown their contempt for her and chased her; but that little
midget! no, indeed, grown-up fellows like them did not waste either
words or blows on such small fry! It would be a good plan, however, to
talk with her a bit and hear whether another herder was not coming to
take her place. After that they would have nothing more to do with her.
They could get along by themselves for one summer. All that was
necessary was to frighten her a little, so that she would keep out of
their way.

They came over to Lisbeth and stood before her, big-boy-like, with
their hands in their pockets. Then one of them said, "Are you going to
be the Hoel herder this summer?"

"Yes," answered Lisbeth. Then, as if to excuse herself, she added
quickly, "Kjersti wanted me to."

"What is your name?"

"Lisbeth; and Jacob calls me Longfrock."

"Where are you from?"

"From Peerout."

"Are you Jacob Peerout's sister? We went to school with him last
winter."

"Yes, I am."

"What a nuisance that Jacob himself did not come! We haven't any use at
all for young ones like you up here."

The speaker, who was the larger of the two boys, stood awhile waiting
for a reply; but Lisbeth did not know what answer to make to his remark
and therefore said nothing. So he continued: "Well, we only wanted to
say to you--I'm Ole Hoegseth and that fellow over there is Peter
Lunde--that you must keep out of our way. You must not dare to come a
step beyond a line running from Pancake Stone down around the Sloping
Marsh to the Pointing Stump near the Hoegseth cow path. If you let
your animals graze beyond that line, your brother Jacob, next winter,
shall get all the thrashings you ought to have this summer."

Lisbeth was dreadfully frightened and her mouth began to tremble. Then
the second boy said to the larger one, "Yes, but Jacob is so strong
that he will get the best of you."

"Not when I have brought myself into good training. Hoi!" and he turned
a handspring.

"Now you know what Jacob may expect, so take care what you do! We boys
are going up to the Sloping Marsh to bathe. Ho-i-ho!"

With shout and call they took their way up over the hill again. At the
top they looked back and then glanced a little dubiously at each other.
Lisbeth Longfrock was still standing where they had left her, and--she
was crying!

Lisbeth felt very small and forlorn as she stood there. She certainly
did not want to do anything that Jacob would get a thrashing for. If
she only knew where it was that she was not allowed to go! but she had
not the least idea where either the Pointing Stump or the Sloping Marsh
lay. All that she could do would be to keep with her animals and find
out about these places later.

Sometime afterwards, when Lisbeth had mounted a small round hill, she
heard the bells of the boys' flocks again. That gave her a fright, and
she began to chase her animals off in another direction. But as she
turned around to do so she saw, far, far down the marsh, two white
figures running, jumping, and playing leapfrog in the sunshine beside a
gleaming pond. The boys had let their flocks stray away from them!

Lisbeth dreaded incurring more displeasure, but surely something ought
to be done. There was no help for it; she would really have to take
care of the stray animals for a while. The boys could not be angry at
that, she knew, because the greatest disgrace that can befall a herder
is the losing of his flock, and for boys so big as these to go back to
the sæter without any animals would be especially humiliating.

So Lisbeth went to work gathering the flocks together, jumping up on a
mound every now and then to see if the boys were not ready to come; but
they appeared to have forgotten everything except their play.

At length she saw that the boys suddenly stood still and listened,
peering about in all directions. Then they started into activity again,
snatched up their clothes, put them on in great haste, and started off
on a run toward the opposite edge of the marsh. Every little while they
would stop and listen, and then run on again. They were so far off that
there was no use in Lisbeth's shouting to them or trying to give the
call "Ho-i-ho!"

When the boys reached a round hill that lay on the other side of the
marsh, they ran to the top and again peered in all directions for a
long time. Then, as fast as their legs could carry them, they made
their way back across the marsh straight toward the small round hill
where Lisbeth was. As they neared it Lisbeth thought that now was the
time to give the herder's call, for the flocks were on the other side
of the hill and their bells could not be heard by the boys. Her first
call was too weak. She gave another somewhat stronger.

The boys stopped and answered.

Lisbeth called again, "Ho-i-ho!" and then the boys came up the hill.
They found it a little difficult to break the silence. It was rather
annoying to be obliged to question that "young one" about their flocks;
but there was no other way.

"Have you seen our animals?"

Lisbeth looked at them pleadingly. "They are here at the foot of the
hill. I have been taking care of them, but you must not thrash Jacob
for it."

The boys looked as they felt,--rather crestfallen. But they had to say
something, so Ole remarked, as they turned and left her, "Oh, well, we
'll let him off for this one time."

                     *      *      *      *      *

When Lisbeth went to fasten the gate of the fold that evening Peter
Lunde came bobbing along outside the fence.

"You haven't a strange sheep here, have you?"

"No; I have counted mine."

"Well, perhaps I counted mine wrong. Very likely they are all there."

The two stood looking at each other for a while; then both grew shy and
had to turn their eyes away. At last Peter said: "Lisbeth, if you want
to, you may tend your flock wherever we tend ours, and you may come to
our pond. I understood Ole to say that he is willing, too; but if he
makes any fuss about it, why I _can_ thrash him if I really want to."

"Yes, I will come gladly, you may be sure."

"Well, then, I will come after you to-morrow morning, back of the hill
here."

Lisbeth did not get a chance to say anything more, for Peter was off
like a flash around the corner. He had seen Ole coming.

Ole came lounging along in his usual fashion, with his hands in his
pockets.

"You haven't seen a strange sheep, have you?"

"No."

"Humph!"

"Is one of yours missing?"

"Oh, I don't know exactly. Humph! I thought I would tell you that you
need not bother yourself about what I said to-day. I did not mean
anything by it. It was Peter that made me say it; and if you want me
to, I can thrash him for it to-morrow."




CHAPTER VI

THE TAMING OF CROOKHORN


It was early morning in the latter part of the summer, and the sun was
shining brightly over Hoel Sæter.

Lisbeth was alone inside the fold, milking goats. All was quiet and
peaceful. Not a bell was heard. The only sounds were the gentle rush of
the river far below and an occasional soft thud from the cow house when
a cow bumped her horns against the wall in getting up. The milkmaid was
inside the cow house, milking the cows. Lisbeth's hands were still too
small for that work, so it had been arranged that she should have
entire charge of the goats instead of helping with the larger animals.

Suddenly from the hill above the sæter rang out "Ho-o-i-ho!" and in a
few minutes the call was answered a little farther off with a touch of
irritation in the tone, "Ho-o-i-ho!"

[Illustration: UP AT THE SÆTER]

Lisbeth looked up and listened. Then with a smile of happy satisfaction
she went over to the fence and called, "Ho-o-i-ho!" Now she could send
out the tones with vigor, so that they rang back from all the hills
around; her voice no longer trembled when she answered the big boys'
call.

To-day she knew that they were calling especially to summon her, and
that they dared to come close to the sæter with their animals because
they had an errand,--something that they had planned with the milkmaid
and Lisbeth.

By the sound of the bells she could tell that the boys were driving the
animals as fast as they could. The boy that was behind--Peter, of
course--was provoked at not being first.

But, if you please, they would have to wait until she had finished her
work. They were out extremely early to-day!

                     *      *      *      *      *

However strange it may seem, Lisbeth Longfrock, soon after her arrival
at Hoel Sæter, had become a prime favorite with the other herders. The
day after her first painful experiences the boys, as proposed, had met
her behind the hill, Peter first and then Ole. No reference was made to
the previous day; it was merely taken for granted that in future she
would be with them. Ole said that she could look after their animals,
together with her own, while they went off to bathe. Peter thought she
could, too. So she agreed to the arrangement.

But the boys did not play very long on the bank of the pond that day
when they had finished bathing. It was not much fun, after all, to be
down there by themselves.

So it had come to pass that Lisbeth and her animals never came
strolling over the hill in the morning without meeting the boys. They
generally came at nearly the same time, each from the direction of his
own sæter, apparently trying to see who could be the first to give the
call. But when they met each did his best to make out to the other that
he had come there by the merest chance, both sheepishly realizing that
the very evening before they had put on big-boy airs about "that young
one whom they could never get rid of," and had said that they would go
off in an entirely different direction the next day, to avoid her if
possible.

Often the boys would have athletic contests, turning handsprings and
wrestling from one meal-time to another because neither boy was willing
to give up beaten. More than once in a single morning or afternoon
would Lisbeth have to remind them to look after their animals, because,
completely forgotten by the boys, the flocks had strayed nearly out of
sight.

Occasionally it happened that one boy would reach Hoel Sæter ten or
fifteen minutes before the other and would find Lisbeth ready to set
out. In that case the first comer would insist that he and Lisbeth
should start out by themselves, urging that the other boy had probably
gone somewhere else that day. Such times were almost the pleasantest,
Lisbeth thought, for then the one boy had always so much to show her
that the other boy did not know about,--a marshy ledge, white as snow
with cloudberry blossoms, where there would be many, many berries in
the autumn (that ledge they could keep for themselves,--it was not
worth while to let the other boy know about everything they found); or
a ptarmigan nest with thirteen big eggs in it; or a ridge where
scouring rushes[12] grew unusually long and thick.

      [12] A species of horsetail rush (_Equisetum hyemale_), having a
      rough, flinty surface. It is used for scouring and polishing.

Each boy talked more with her, too, when by himself, and was less
boastful and rough. And the one boy would climb trees and get spruce
gum for her, while she would seek scouring rush for him. Scouring rush
is something that requires a special knack in the one who is to
discover it, and the boys had never seen Lisbeth's equal in spying it
out. Peter said that if there was a single spear growing anywhere, you
might be sure that she would find it; to which Ole jokingly responded
that, for his part, he believed she could find one even where there
wasn't any!

And how many, many things both boys thought of that they could make!
One day when it rained Ole made Lisbeth a hat out of birch bark, and
the next day Peter came with a pair of birch-bark shoes for her. The
milkmaid must have laughed when she saw Lisbeth coming home that second
day wearing the birch-bark hat and shoes, and carrying her ordinary
shoes in her hand. Another day Ole gave her a pocketknife. She ought to
have something to whittle with, he thought, and he did not need that
knife because he had one with a sheath that he always wore in his belt.
The next day Peter brought her a musical horn that he had made in the
evenings from a goat's horn. It had an unusually fine tone. You could
manage to play that funny tune, "Old Woman with a Stick," on it after a
fashion.

Ole speculated a while as to what he could do to beat that, and then he
hit upon an idea,--he would tame Crookhorn!

They had often seen Crookhorn going with the cows as if she were one of
them; and they knew that though she was Lisbeth's own goat there was no
use in trying to make her go with the other goats. The little girl had
told them how impossible it had been to manage the creature at the
farm, and that Kjersti had said the men would have to make an end of
her when winter came.

So Ole offered to tame Crookhorn. He was sure that he could teach her
to go with the others. There had never been a goat yet that had not
been forced to yield when he attempted to master it.

Yes, indeed, Lisbeth was more than willing for him to try. If he
succeeded, she would gladly give him all she owned.

No, Ole did not want any payment for doing it; but if she insisted on
giving him something, he would like the goat's horns after the goat was
slaughtered, as it would have to be some day. They would make matchless
horns to blow upon.

But Peter, too, wanted to have a share in the undertaking. If the goat
proved to be very cross and obstinate, two persons would surely be
needed to tame her. Then they could have one horn apiece.

Ole did not know whether he would agree to that or not, for it was he
who had thought of the plan.

Yes, but how could he carry it out? Peter did not believe that
Crookhorn could be made to go with the other goats unless there was a
stronger goat for her to be fastened to. Ole did not have such a one.
It was Peter who had the big billy goat, the only one strong enough for
the task.

Yes, that was true; so Peter might help in taming Crookhorn if he would
lend his billy goat.

Lisbeth, for her part, thought they ought all to help; that was the
only proper way. And her suggestion was finally followed.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Ole's taming of Crookhorn was the errand that brought the boys to the
Hoel Sæter on the morning that Lisbeth and the milkmaid were doing
their milking so early.

The two flocks came pushing and crowding over the hill; but as soon as
the animals realized that they were to be allowed to go close to the
sæter, they began to run at full speed. It was always such fun to go to
a strange place! They would be sure to find something new to see and to
stick their noses into,--perhaps a little milk stirabout in the pig
trough, a little salt on the salting stone, or a hole in the fence
where one could get a chance to squeeze through without being seen.

The bells clanged, the boys ran about shouting and hallooing and giving
their musical calls, trying to keep the worst goats in order, but
perhaps making a little more noise than was necessary.

Where all had been so still before there was now the liveliest
commotion. The milkmaid could not resist going to the cow-house door to
look out; and Lisbeth would surely have forgotten to milk the last of
her goats if it had not come over to her of its own accord and stood
directly in her way as she was going out of the fold.

When Ole saw the milkmaid at the cow-house door he called out, "Shall
you not let out your cattle soon?"

"Yes; I am just ready to," answered the milkmaid. "Are you ready,
Lisbeth?"

"I am milking my last goat."

Soon everything was done, and the animals stood waiting to be let out.

Ole had with him a strong band woven of willow withes, with an
ingeniously fastened loop at each end. One loop was for Peter's billy
goat, the other for Crookhorn. Ole thought it was a very fine apparatus
indeed.

"Where is Crookhorn?"

"In the cow house."

"Then I had better go in and get her myself. Bring your goat, Peter,
and hold him ready."

Peter called his big billy goat. It knew its name and came at once.

"Let me see how strong you are," said Peter. He took hold of its horns,
held its head down, and pushed against it. The billy goat bunted, took
a fresh start, bunted again,--they often played in this way,--and sent
Peter against the fence.

"There!" exclaimed Peter, picking himself up; "I rather think that
billy goat is strong enough to drag any goat along, no matter how big a
one." Peter fairly glowed with pride.

Ole, too, wanted to try the strength of the goat. Yes, it was an
amazingly strong goat.

Then Ole went into the cow house, and in a few moments came back
leading Crookhorn by the band of willow withes. The next step was to
fasten the other loop around the billy goat's neck, and behold! there
stood the two goats harnessed together. But neither of them seemed to
notice that anything had been done.

Lisbeth and the milkmaid and the boys waited a while expectantly; but
the billy goat rather enjoyed being looked at, and would not budge so
long as they and the flocks were near by. He merely stood still and
wanted to be petted.

So Ole said: "Let your animals out, Lisbeth, and start ours on the
path, Peter. Then we shall see a double-team grazing contest."

Lisbeth opened the gate and her animals crowded out, taking their
customary way up over the hill. Peter drove his own flock and Ole's
after them.

Seeing this, the billy goat thought it was high time for him to be
jogging along, so he took a step forward; but something was the matter.
He looked back. Who was playing tricks and hindering him?

He saw Crookhorn with all four legs planted fast on the ground and her
neck stretched out.

"Pooh! nothing but that," thought the billy goat, taking a couple of
steps forward. Crookhorn found herself obliged to follow, but she laid
her head back and struggled. Then the billy goat gathered all his
force, set his horns high in the air, and tugged at the band. He would
show her that he was not to be kept back by any such foolery!

Crookhorn again found herself obliged to follow, but she resisted and
resisted with all her might. At length her fore legs doubled up under
her and she sank upon her knees; but the billy goat went on as if
