nothing had happened, and Crookhorn had to follow on her knees across
the whole flat part of the sæter field.

Lisbeth and the boys shrieked with laughter, and even the milkmaid
found it impossible not to join in.

When Crookhorn reached the beginning of the hill, where the ground was
more uneven, she thought it wiser to get up and trot along on her four
feet; but although she yielded thus far for the sake of her own
comfort, she still continued to struggle against being forced to go at
all.

The animals took the customary path leading farther over the mountain.
Little by little Crookhorn seemed to conclude that she must submit to
the inevitable. During the first part of the morning she was sullen and
contrary, merely allowing herself to be dragged along; but as the day
wore on and her stomach felt empty and slack, she grew more subdued and
began to walk quietly forward, eating as she went like any other
goat,--only looking up once in a while when she heard the heavy cow
bell in the distance.

The fun was gone when Crookhorn took to behaving well, so the boys
began as usual to wrestle and turn somersaults; and this they kept up
until it was nearly time to go home for their nooning. Then Ole said:
"Now let us slip her loose on trial. I think she must be cured by this
time."

Yes, the others agreed to that.

So they called to the billy goat coaxingly. He came jogging along with
his big horns straight up and Crookhorn trailing after him. Ole first
set the billy goat free, and then, kneeling down before Crookhorn, he
took hold of her beard. Crookhorn pawed with her feet as goats do when
they want to get rid of this hold, but Ole would not let go. He wished
to give her a few admonitions first.

Now that she had found her master, he told her, she need no longer
imagine that she was a cow. Hereafter she was to behave like other
goats or she would have him to deal with; and at this he gave her beard
a wag, as if to add force to his words. That hurt Crookhorn, and she
made a bound straight at him and sent him rolling backward. Then,
passing directly over him, with the willow band trailing behind her,
she set out on a trot across the marsh in the direction from which the
sound of the cow bell had come.

Ole scrambled up again, stamped the ground with rage, and started after
her.

Lisbeth and Peter were already on the way. They shouted and screamed as
they ran, and threatened Crookhorn with all sorts of punishments if she
did not stop; but Crookhorn acted as if she did not understand. She
ran, and they after her. The boys became more and more angry. It had
never happened before that they had been unable to capture a goat; and
besides, each boy was eager to get ahead of the other. So they ran
faster and faster. Although Lisbeth Longfrock was light-footed,
especially with her birch-bark shoes[13] on, she lagged behind. It was
like wading in deep water to try to run in that long frock of hers,
which, in the hasty start of the morning, she had forgotten to tuck up
in her belt as usual.

      [13] Lisbeth's ordinary shoes were clumsy wooden ones.

Soon she caught a last glimpse of the boys as they disappeared over a
hill on the other side of the marsh. Peter was ahead (she believed he
really was the faster runner of the two). But she herself was only in
the middle of the marsh.

So she stopped. Certainly the best thing that she could do was to go
back and get the animals together; otherwise all three flocks were
likely to stray away.

She turned back, recrossed the marsh, and had climbed the hill a little
way when she heard a rumbling and thudding noise, which grew constantly
louder and louder, while the ground seemed to roll in waves under her
feet. What could it be? Around the foot of the hill came a big herd of
horses[14]--oh, what a big herd! There were horses old and young, and
foals running beside their mothers; horses brown, dun-colored, black,
and white; and all of them were so bright and shiny and fat and
skittish! They trotted and ran, with heads tossing,--those ahead being
passed by others, then those behind getting ahead again,--making a
noise almost like the booming of thunder.

      [14] Horses, as well as other animals, are sent up on the
      mountains to graze during the summer. They roam about at will,
      and sometimes go home of their own accord at the end of the
      season, if no one has been sent to fetch them.

Lisbeth stood still and watched them, half afraid. She had never seen
so big a herd before. They noticed her, too, but they did not run at
her at all. Only two or three stopped, pricked up their ears, and gazed
at her, trying to make out what kind of little creature she could be.
Then they ran on again, and in an instant the whole herd had gone past.
Lisbeth could only hear the thunder of their hoofs as they galloped
into the path leading to the sæter.

But her animals! and the boys' flocks! Naturally the horses had
frightened them. Lisbeth could see no trace of them anywhere. She ran
from hill to hill, stopping to listen and then running again.

It was all of no use; she could not find them. The only wise course for
her was to go back to the sæter.

This was the first and only time that Lisbeth Longfrock went home
without taking her animals with her.

But when she reached the sæter there lay the whole flock peacefully
within the fold, chewing the cud. They had gone home of their own
accord. The horses that had given Lisbeth such a fright were there
also, walking about and licking up the salt which the milkmaid had
strewn for them.

In the afternoon the milkmaids from the other sæters came to inquire
after the boys, for their goats had also come home of themselves long
before the usual time.

It was not until much later that Ole and Peter arrived, dragging
Crookhorn between them.

When the milkmaids laughed at them the boys could not help feeling a
little chagrined. That they had let their flocks stray away could not
be denied; but no one could say that they had come home without any
animal at all,--although two big boys _did_ seem a rather liberal
number to be in charge of a single goat, however large that goat might
be.

Things had gone wrong for that day, Ole acknowledged; but Crookhorn was
not to think that she had seen the end of the struggle. They would take
her with them again the next day. She should get her deserts.

But it turned out otherwise. Crookhorn knew better than to let such a
thing happen. When they took off the willow band she stood still awhile
with her neck stretched up, looking at the horses which were at that
moment going out of the inclosure. Suddenly she kicked up her hind legs
in real horse fashion, and then away she went after the herd as fast as
she could go.

The milkmaids, as well as the boys, could do nothing but stand and gape
when they saw her join the horses.

"Probably she imagines now that she is a horse," thought they.

For a while they stood in silence watching the receding herd. Then Ole
said in his dry fashion, "If there had been any elephants here, it
would have been just like Crookhorn to imagine herself an elephant."




CHAPTER VII

HOME FROM THE SÆTER


Summer, with its light nights and brilliant days, comes rapidly to full
power on the mountains in Norway. The season is brief but intense.

It begins with a creeping of light green over the gentle slopes and
unending marshes, and a trickling of light green down around each
_tue_, or little mound of earth covered with moss and tiny berry
plants. Ptarmigans roam about in solitary pairs, murmuring when any one
comes too near their nests; gnats and horseflies buzz through the air;
and cows, with tails set straight up, scamper friskily about, trying to
escape the irritating stings.

Over everything lies a thick, warm, dark-blue haze, hindering a free
outlook.

But soon come the blueberries, the marsh wool or cotton grass, and
later the cloudberries; and on some fine day when the mother ptarmigans
go out to walk, peeping sounds are heard around them, here, there, and
everywhere. The mother birds scold more than ever, now that their young
ones are whirling like so many feathery balls a yard or more upward,
and two or three yards forward, and then tumbling down into the heather
again, head foremost. By this time the cows roam about quietly and
meditatively over the mountain, seeking the juiciest, best-flavored
herbage to nibble; the warm haze melts away and the air becomes so
sparklingly clear that mountain peaks miles distant are as delicately
and sharply outlined as the nearest little mound. Then the cloudberry
blossoms fall, and soon the marshes grow yellow and red, the tiny
blossoms of the heather color all the knolls and rocky places, the
greenness vanishes, and over the patches of white reindeer moss, which
shine out like snow here and there on the mountain, comes a blush of
red and a tinge of brown. Autumn is now drawing near.

Much of the time the sun shines brightly, and when it does, how
glorious to be the herder of a flock!

But there come days also when the fog spreads itself like a close gray
blanket, under which the ground, with its mounds and bushes and
heather, creeps stealthily, disappearing a few yards away. And out of
the fog comes a fine, mist-like rain, which deposits itself in tiny
gray beads on every blade and every pine needle, so that wherever any
one goes there is a little sprinkling of water.

In such weather it is far from pleasant to be in charge of a flock. If
the animals move forward quietly, the herder must seek shelter under
every bush, with a piece of sacking over his shoulders to shield him
from the wet. But it is far more likely that he will be obliged to run
about, with the water squeezing in and out of his shoes, trying to keep
track of his animals; for in weather like this the mushrooms spring up
plentifully and the animals scatter eagerly in all directions to find
them, scorning other food when these may be obtained. Sometimes when
the herder is speeding along the edge of the marsh, a pair of large,
powerful cranes, who are on their journey south, will loom suddenly
before him out of the fog. This startles him greatly, for the cranes
seem to the herder much larger than they really are. They look like a
couple of great sheep with wings on.

Later in the season comes a morning when all is glistening white. A
little snow has fallen during the night,--not enough to last, however;
it melts away as the day goes on. But after this the animals no longer
like to go up on the higher parts of the mountain. The cows stand
lowing at the gate of the sæter inclosure; they know that sooner or
later they will be allowed to slip in there to enjoy the last of the
mountain's good grazing. The goats look inquiringly backward as they
are let out of the fold. Summer is over. Every one longs to go down
again to the home farm.

At last a day comes when the gate is opened and the cows rush into the
sæter inclosure. They know now that they will not have to go up on the
bare mountain again this year. Then the farm hands come up with pack
horses, and other horses that have been running wild on the mountain
all summer are found and taken home. The packs are tied up; there is a
great washing, a clearing away of rubbish and putting things in order
for the next summer, and at last _Bufar_ day, the long-expected day of
returning to the home farm, arrives.

                     *      *      *      *      *

On Bufar day Lisbeth Longfrock stood up on the ridge of the
turf-covered cow-house roof, taking a final look at the surrounding
scene. She was all ready for the journey. Her lunch bag was on her
back, her birch-bark hat on her head, and the goat horn which Peter had
given her hung on a string around her neck. In her hand she carried a
stout stick. Within the sæter inclosure the cows and smaller animals
were roving back and forth from fence to fence impatiently. They knew
that Bufar day had come, for along the wall of the sæter hut, in a row,
stood the horses' packs, filled with butter tubs, cheese tubs, and
cheese boxes; and tied to the fence were the horses themselves. All of
these had pack saddles on, except the military horse, which stood
foremost among them, bearing a woman's saddle. The farm hands stood
outside, too, smoking their pipes. They were all ready, and were only
waiting for the milkmaid, who was inside the hut making the last batch
of cheese from the morning's milk, which she could not allow to be
wasted.

While Lisbeth was standing on the ridge of the cow house Ole and Peter
came bobbing along past the fence of the fold. They were not so
boisterous as usual to-day, and stopped at the gate, looking at Lisbeth
without saying a word at first. Then Peter asked, "Are you going back
to the farm to-day, Lisbeth?"

"Yes, I am all ready."

With one impulse Lisbeth and the boys gazed over the mountain's
familiar expanse.

"The mountain begins to look barren now," said Peter; "but I shall be
here a week longer."

"So long as that?" said Lisbeth. "And you, Ole?"

"I am going day after to-morrow."

All three were silent again for a while. Then Lisbeth said: "I suppose
I must go with the others now. They surely must be ready."

She descended from the roof and went over to where the boys were. The
conversation came to a standstill again; they could not think of
anything to say. Finally Peter spoke.

"Are you coming again next summer, Lisbeth?"

"Yes, if Kjersti Hoel is pleased with me; but that can hardly be
expected, since I am going home without Crookhorn."

"It would take a horse trainer to look after her," said Ole.

Again there was silence. Then Ole said: "We did not go up to Glory Peak
this summer, to see the spot the king once visited."

"No, we didn't."

"We two boys are coming here again next summer, both of us."

"Perhaps we can go to Glory Peak after all then, even if it is so far
away."

"Yes, we can," said Ole. "And I can tell you a good deal about the
king's visit, for my father went with him and drove."

"Drove the king's carriage?"

"No, not the king's; the county magistrate's."

"My father went with him, too," said Peter, "and drove; so I can tell
about it as well as you."

"Yes, but whose carriage did he drive? A homely old woman's!"

"But that homely old woman was next in rank to the queen. She was the
one who went off to walk with the queen at the foot of Glory Peak."

Just then came a call for Lisbeth. She hesitated a moment, then
stretched out her little hand and said: "Good-by. May you both fare
well. Thanks for this summer."

"Thanks to you for the same," said Ole. "We are to meet again, then,
next summer?"

"Yes."

"May you fare well," said Peter.

He stood holding her hand awhile; then, thinking he ought to say
something more, he added, "I will greet Jacob from you, Lisbeth."

After that the boys vanished along the fence as noiselessly as they had
come.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Inside the sæter inclosure the farm hands were putting the packs on the
horses, and the military horse had been led to the gate. Lisbeth ran
into the inclosure, drove her animals together and counted them,
certainly for the tenth time that day. Soon everything stood ready for
the homeward march.

The milkmaid appeared in the doorway, clad in her Sunday best, as on
the day she came. She closed the sæter door with a bang, turned the
large key solemnly in the lock, took it out and put it in her pocket.
That key she would not intrust to any one else; she wanted to deliver
it to Kjersti Hoel with her own hand. After trying the door vigorously
to be sure that it was securely locked, she went to the window and
looked in to assure herself that everything was in order and the fire
entirely out. Then, going over to the military horse, she climbed into
the saddle. One of the farm hands opened the gate for her as if she had
been a queen, and out she rode.

After her followed the pack horses, one by one, and the cows in the
same order as when they came up,--the bell cow, Brindle, and the whole
long line. Behind the cows came the smaller animals, and, last of all,
Lisbeth Longfrock with a stick in her hand, her birch-bark hat on her
head, and her lunch bag on her back.

Lisbeth turned and looked at the scene she was leaving. There lay the
sæter, desolate now. The mountain, too, appeared lonely and forsaken.
Of course she, like all the others, had longed for home during these
last days; but it was strange, after all, for her to be going away from
everything up here. A little of the same feeling she had had when
leaving Peerout Castle crept over her. How singular that she should
happen to recall that sad time just at this moment! She had not thought
of it at all since coming up on the mountain,--not once during the
whole long summer.

Nor would she think of it now; there were other and happier things to
remember. God be praised, all had gone well at the sæter, and the whole
procession was on its way home. She was taking her animals safely
back,--all except Crookhorn. Of her she had seen nothing since that day
when the boys had tried to tame her; but she had heard that far off on
the mountain a big goat went about with a herd of horses.

                     *      *      *      *      *

All day long the great procession went on its way over the mountain in
steady, plodding fashion. The animals were fatter and heavier than in
the spring; they trod the hills with a brisker and firmer step, and
none showed any sign of being tired or lagging behind. The milkmaid was
rosy-cheeked and plump ("Butterpack" she was always called in the
autumn). As she and Lisbeth looked at the procession, one from the
front and the other from the rear, they agreed in thinking that the
animals, as well as the butter and cheese, were such as they need not
be ashamed to take home to Kjersti Hoel.

Evening was drawing near, when suddenly the road pitched down over the
edge of the mountain, the valley began to open before them, and they
could even catch a glimpse of the slope on the other side. Every one
looked over there, but all that could be seen as yet was a strip along
the uppermost edge. The only one to distinguish a house upon the strip
was Lisbeth Longfrock. Away up and off to one side she saw the setting
sun glittering on a little pane of glass in a low gray hut. That hut
was Peerout Castle.

Then all at once they came out upon the open mountain side, and the
whole valley lay before them, broad and peaceful, with its yellow
fields and stacks of grain, its green spaces, and its slope of birch
trees flaming in yellow, with here and there a red mountain ash among
them. And over across they spied Hoel,--large, substantial, and well
cared for,--with its broad, shining windows and its general air of
comfort. Smoke was issuing from its chimney,--such an inviting,
coffee-suggesting, welcoming smoke! Kjersti had probably hung the
coffee kettle over the fire already, so as to receive them in a
suitable manner.

The whole procession now began to show more life. Every member of it
knew that Kjersti Hoel stood over there in the window watching the long
line as it curved down the open slope. All moved forward more quickly.
The horses hurried ahead; the cows began to trot, the bell cow sending
out an eager Moo-oo! across the valley; the bells jingled merrily; and
Lisbeth Longfrock trilled a vigorous call through her little goat horn.
They wanted every one to hear that the great company of animals
belonging to Hoel Farm was now coming back again.

Thus they hastened down to the bottom of the valley and then up the
opposite side. It was not long before they were actually at home.

Kjersti Hoel herself stood at the cow-house door and opened it for
them. The cows recognized her, and each one of them, as they went by
her in turn, received a word or a pat on the head; after which, proud
and satisfied, they went to their separate stalls,--not a single cow
making a mistake. They went swiftly, too, for they knew that there was
something good in the mangers to welcome them. And they needed
something, surely, for there had not been time to eat anything along
the road that day.

When the milkmaid had dismounted from her horse Kjersti took her hand
and said, "Welcome home!" Then Kjersti went over to the door of the
sheep barn, opened that also, and counted the goats and sheep as they
went in; and when Lisbeth Longfrock came following in their wake,
Kjersti took her hand also and said, "Welcome home!"

"But," faltered Lisbeth, "I have not brought Crookhorn back with me."

"No, I see that you have not; and it is a good thing. Now we shall be
rid of her capers for a while. You have been a faithful and capable
little worker, there is no doubt of that. And how you have grown! Why,
your long frock is far above your toes now!"

Then the milkmaid and Lisbeth fastened the cows in their stalls, while
Kjersti went to watch the unloading of the packs and to look at the
tubs and boxes containing the butter and cheese that had been made at
the sæter.

After that Kjersti came to them again and asked them to "Please walk
in," exactly as if they were grand strangers. And when they had gone
into the house they were invited into Kjersti's own sitting room, both
Lisbeth and the milkmaid. Here the table was set with a welcoming meal,
and oh, how delicious the food smelled! There were large hot pancakes
as thin as paper, and pease bread, and hot new potatoes,--the finest
feast you can give to people just home from a sæter. And Kjersti
herself poured coffee for them and begged them to help themselves. Then
they had to give an account of everything that had happened on the
mountain; to tell about the cows,--which of them had given the most
milk and which of them had stopped giving; about the sheep, goats, and
pigs; and about the butter and cheese that had been made. And then
Kjersti praised her two servants for their faithfulness and industry,
and the trio rejoiced together over the success of the summer.

That evening when Lisbeth Longfrock again lay stretched out on her
little bed in her room under the hall stairs and thought back over the
summer and about the mountain, it seemed to her that she had had a
glorious time, as delightful as could be thought of; but, all the same,
it was pleasant to come home again, too,--especially when one was
welcomed by such an unusually fine woman as Kjersti Hoel.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Autumn was passing away. The leaves had fallen and the trees spread out
naked branches into the cold air. In the fields where grain had grown
stood only the poles, now bare and slanting, on which the crops had
been stacked. The verdure of the meadows was changed to yellowish
brown.

There was no more food for the animals out of doors, so slaughtering
day had come. That is the end of the season for the young herder, for
on that day he gives up his responsibility. Thenceforward he is no
longer a person with a special duty; he must be at every one's beck and
call. And when winter comes with its long evenings, when the wood fire
gleams out over the huge kitchen from the great open fireplace, while
wool is being carded and the spinning wheel whirs, and the farm hands
make brooms out of twigs and whittle thole pins and ax handles, then
must the herder sit by the pile of twigs and logs at the side of the
fireplace and feed the fire so that the rest can see to work while he
studies his lessons.

By the pile of wood in Kjersti Hoel's big kitchen Lisbeth Longfrock had
her place on the long winter evenings. She studied and listened, and
heard so many curious things talked about that it seemed as if the
evenings were too short and the days too few, in spite of the long,
dark Norwegian winter. Before she knew it spring had come again; and
when she looked down at her long frock she found that the hem reached
no farther than the tops of her ankles.




CHAPTER VIII

ON GLORY PEAK


It was again high summer, and the sun shone bright on all the mountain
tops when, one morning, an ear-splitting call played on three goat
horns rang suddenly out from the inclosure belonging to Hoel sæter. One
call was thin and fine, the other two were heavier.

That triple signal meant "Forward, march!" Lisbeth Longfrock, Ole, and
Peter were going to take their trip to Glory Peak to see the spot that
had been visited by the king.

The boys now owned goat horns to blow on, and they were good ones, too;
for Lisbeth Longfrock had kept her word about Crookhorn's horns and had
given one to each boy.

After Crookhorn's running off with the herd of horses, things had not
gone any better with that proud-minded goat. When she finally came
home, late in the autumn, with the last of the horses, she was so
conceited that there was no getting her to live in the barn with the
other goats. They had to put her in the cow house; but not even the cow
house was good enough for her after her summer experiences. Every time
she got an opportunity, out she bounded, trotting over to the door of
the stable as if she belonged in there. The stable boy insisted that he
had even heard her neigh. One day, when the men were feeding the
horses, they saw her dash in, and, with her usual self-important air,
attempt to squeeze her way into the stall of the military horse. But
that she should not have done. It was dark, and the military horse
failed to see that it was only Crookhorn at his heels; so up went his
hind legs and out went a kick that landed plump on Crookhorn's cranium
and sent her flying against the stable wall. That was the last of
Crookhorn.

It cannot be said that any one, except perhaps Lisbeth Longfrock,
sorrowed particularly over her; but Lisbeth could not help remembering
that Crookhorn had given them milk for their coffee that winter up at
Peerout Castle. At any rate, if not much sorrowed for, the queer,
ambitious creature was held in honorable esteem after her death. Such
horns as hers Ole had never seen. Not only were they extremely large,
but they gave out a peculiarly fine sound. Any one would know at once
that they were not the horns of an ordinary goat. There had always been
something about Crookhorn that no one understood, Ole said. Yes, Peter
had noticed that too. Afterward, when he had thought a little more on
the subject, he said he believed that horses' horns would have exactly
the same sound as those of this remarkable goat, if there were any
horses with horns!

On the day of the visit to Glory Peak the goat horns, as musical
instruments, were brand-new, being used that day for the first time. In
fact, the trip had been put off until they were ready.

But new goat horns were not the only things the travelers were provided
with. All three wore their best clothes, and each carried a lunch bag
full of food on his back and a stout stick in his hand. The trip was so
long that it would take a whole day.

Once more they blew their horns,--all three together. The animals
looked up in surprise at the unusual volume of sound, and the milkmaid
came to the cow-house door with a smiling face. Then off the party
started. The flocks were mingled together to-day, and driven straight
ahead,--no time for them to graze by the wayside with Glory Peak lying
so far away, blue against the sky. This excursion was a much longer one
than Lisbeth had ever before taken, and even Ole and Peter had been to
Glory Peak but once.

                     *      *      *      *      *

It was drawing on toward dinner time when they came to the last gentle
ascent leading to the top of Glory Peak. There the juniper bushes and
"old woman's switches" (dwarf birch) grew so high that the animals were
quite lost to sight among them. Lisbeth and the boys could only see the
course of their charges by a wavelike movement that passed over the
tops of the bushes and by the sticking up of a pair of horns here and
there. Ole thought that this was a good place to leave the flocks for a
time, while they themselves went on ahead. The animals were so tired
and hungry that they would stay there quietly for an hour or so; then,
when rested, they would be sure to follow to the peak, for a goat was
never satisfied until it had mounted to the highest possible point,
where it could look about in all directions. Ole's plan was assented
to, and it proved to be a good one.

Ole led Lisbeth and Peter around a curve toward the north. He wanted to
show them exactly where the king and queen came up on the day of their
visit. To be sure, they were not really king and queen that day, but
they were on the very point of being: they were crown prince and crown
princess. They had left their horses down on the mountain side where
the road grew too steep for driving, and had walked the rest of the
way. Oh, what a large company they had with them!--the county
magistrate, the district judge, and officers so richly dressed that
they could scarcely move. Seven or eight of the principal farmers of
the district were also in the company, and first among these were
Nordrum, Jacob's master, and the master of Hoel Farm, who was then
living. These two wore queer old-fashioned swallow-tailed coats. All
around over the whole mountain top were crowds of other people gazing
at the lively scene.

"The king looked wonderfully fine, didn't he?" asked Lisbeth.

"No. The county magistrate looked much finer, and so did the officers,
and even the people who waited upon them. But it could easily be seen
that he was the king, for he was a head taller than any of the others."

"The king must be tremendously strong," said Peter.

"Strong! Of course he is! And he must have use for every bit of his
strength, too, for he has to govern all the others."

"Was the queen also very large?" asked Lisbeth.

"No, she was not much larger than an ordinary woman. She was unusually
earnest and modest-looking, father said. There was not so much fuss and
feathers with her as with the other women folk."

"No," said Peter; "the old frump that my father drove laughed even at
the magistrate, and found fault because his hands were too big."

"Humph!" said Ole; "that _was_ a joke. As if a grown-up fellow should
not have big fists! Anyhow, I don't see how she could have seen them,
for the magistrate wore his white gloves, although it was high summer."

Ole resumed the part of showman.

"Next they came up over this way,--the whole company, close by that
very stone there; and then the king ran on ahead of them. He wanted to
be the first to reach the top, as one might know. And now I will show
you exactly what he did. Follow me. I will be the king, and you,
Lisbeth, may be the queen. Come along!"

Ole walked hastily over the last spur of the ground, the others
following. Then, running the last few steps, they found themselves
suddenly on the very top of the mountain! Ole threw out his hand and
stood a long time in silence.

The others stood still also, involuntarily, impressed by the wonderful
sight. Here and there over the endless expanse of mountain shone
glistening lakes and mountain pools, and away off in the distance rose
snow-clad peaks. On every open slope lay green sæters; and toward the
south, as far as the eye could reach, were beautiful farming districts
and dark-green, forest-clad ridges.

Ole, in his character of king, threw out his hand again. "This is the
most beautiful spot I have ever seen!" he cried. Then, after a short
pause, "Come, Sophie, and see!" Ole took Lisbeth's hand and drew her
forward.

"Yes," assented Peter, "that is exactly the way the king did. I have
heard about it, too."

"Of course it was," said Ole. "Don't you think I know?"

"What else did he do?" asked Lisbeth.

"The king and queen then went around and spoke to all the other people,
who began to take out long spyglasses and gaze in all directions and
ask the name of everything.

"The county magistrate, as the highest of the local officials, stood
near the king and queen and pointed things out to them.

"'See that group of distant white peaks,' said the magistrate; 'and
there to the north is Snow-Cap, although I am not sure that you can
distinguish it; and that little black thing farthest away' (Ole pointed
as the magistrate had done) 'is the highest peak in Norway.'[15]

      [15] The mountain referred to is Galdhoepiggen.

"After a while the company turned around, facing the south. When they
saw the view in that direction,--with the great shining lake lying so
far away down there, and the forests stretching farther and farther in
the distance,--even the king himself was astonished. He thought that
the forests must reach almost to Sweden. He had never seen so vast an
extent of forest at one view, king though he was. When they had
